# R

## Data Structures

R has many data structures, which include

- atomic vector
- list
- matrix
- data frame
- ...

To check and convert data type:
- `class()` high-level data type/structures: data frame, matrix, etc
- `typeof()` low-level data type: character, logical, double, integer ...
- `is.sth()`: is numeric? character?
- `as.sth()`: convert to numeric, character etc.
- `identical(x1, x2)`

Comparison of the four data structures

|Dimensions| Homogenous| Heterogeneous|
|-| -| -|
|1-D| atomic vector |list|
|2-D| matrix| data frame|


### Vector

```{margin}
Technically, vectors can be one of two types: atomic vectors and lists, although the term “vector” most commonly refers to the atomic types not to lists.
```

A vector is the most common and basic data structure in R. A vector is a collection of elements that are of one (homogenous) mode `character, logical, integer` or `numeric`.

creation
- empty vector: `vector()` (By default the mode is logical).
  - `vector("character", length = 5)` creates a vector of mode 'character' with 5 elements.
  - `character(5)` same thing
  - `numeric(5)` a numeric vector with 5 elements
  - `logical(5)` # a logical vector with 5 elements
- integer vs numeric
  - `c(1, 2)`: double precision real numbers
  - `c(1L, 2L)`: integer, or use `as.integer()`
- character `c('a', 'b')`, logical, etc.


:::{admonition,note} Note
The contents of a list are not restricted to a **single** mode. If multiple types are inside a vector `c(1, 'a')`, R will create a resulting vector with a mode that can most easily accommodate all the elements it contains. This conversion between modes of storage is called “coercion”. When R converts the mode of storage based on its content, it is referred to as “implicit coercion”.

manual coercion: `as.integer(), as.character()`, etc.
:::


### List

A list can contains elements of different types. Lists are sometimes called generic vectors, because the elements of a list can by of any type of R object, even lists containing further lists. This property makes them fundamentally different from atomic vectors.

Creation
- from vector: `as.list(1:10)`
- from input: `pie = list(type="key lime", diameter=7, is.vegetarian=TRUE)`

Indexing
- by element name: `pie$diameter`
- by brackets: `pie[1]` the first element, `pie[[1]]` the first element in the first element.

### Matrix

A matrix is an extension of the numeric or character vectors. It is simply an atomic vector with dimensions.

### Data Frames

A data frame is a special type of list where every element of the list has same length (i.e. data frame is a “rectangular” list). One can check `is.list(df)` returns `TRUE`.

Data frames can have additional attributes such as `rownames()`.

Creation
- from imported data: `read.csv(), read.table()`
- from vectors: `data.frame(id = letters[1:10], x
= 1:10, y = 11:20)`


Functions
- shape: `dim(), nrow(), ncol(), str()`
- preview data: `head(), tail(), str()`
- `names()` or `colnames()`, `na.omit()`
- `sapply(df, fun)`: run `fun()` function for each column of df

Indexing
- by column name: `df$colname`
- `df[index, col1]`, still matrix
- `df[index, ]$col1`, vector
- `df[row_num, col_num]`, or `df[vec_of_num, vec_of_num]`

Data cleaning
- `is.na()`
- `anyNA()`

### Factors

Factor objects are how R stores categorical variables, which is character data into fixed numbers of integers. Each category is called a 'level'.

```
x = factor(c('a', 'b', 'c', 'a'))
str(x) # Factor w/ 3 levels "a","b","c": 1 2 3 1
typeof(x) # [1] "integer"
levels(x) # [1] "a" "b" "c"
nlevels(x) # 3
```

By default, R always sorts levels in alphabetical order. To specify levels, use `ordered = TRUE`.

```
chili <- factor(c("hotter", "hot", "hotter", "hottest", "hot", "hot"))
factor(chili, levels = c("hot", "hotter", "hottest"), ordered = TRUE)
min(chili) # hot
max(chili) # hottest
```

## Data Visualization via `ggplot`

[cheat sheet](https://github.com/rstudio/cheatsheets/raw/master/data-visualization-2.1.pdf)

### Syntax

Basic syntax is as below:

```R
ggplot(data = [dataset],
       mapping = aes(x = [x-variable],
                     y = [y-variable]) +
    geom_xxx() +
    other_options
```

For instance, scatter plot (point plot) of two variables

```R

ggplot(data = starwars,
       mapping = aes(x = height,
                     y = mass)) +
    geom_point()

```

### Aesthetic Mapping

To display values, map variables in the data to visual properties of the
geom (aesthetics) in your plot, e.g. x and y location, size, shape, color etc. Most of the RHS variables are from data.

```R
mapping = aes(x = height,
              y = mass,
              color = sex))
```


:::{admonition,warning} Warning

Putting `aes()` in different places can affect the final output.

In the coe below, only one smoothing line is fitted. The aesthetic mapping `aes(color=sex)` is in the `geom_point()` plot level. Points will have different colors according to the corresponding sex.

```
ggplot(data = starwars,
       mapping = aes(x = height, y = mass)) +
  geom_point(aes(color=sex)) +
  geom_smooth(se = FALSE) +
  xlim(80, 250) +
  ylim(0, 180)
```

In the code below, the aesthetic mapping `aes(color=sex)` is in the `ggplot()` input level, so the data sets are partitioned into parts by sex, and R runs the next `geom` commands for each part.

```
ggplot(data = starwars,
       mapping = aes(x = height, y = mass, color=sex)) +
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(se = FALSE) +
  xlim(80, 250) +
  ylim(0, 180)

```

:::


| aesthetics | discrete | continuous |
| - | - | - |
| color | rainbow of colors | gradient |
| size | discrete steps | linear mapping between radius and value |
| shape | different shape for each| NA |

### Use of `geom`

Numerical data
- density: `geom_density()`
- histogram: `geom_histogram(binwidth = 10)`
- smoothing line: `geom_smooth(se = FALSE) + xlim() + ylim()`

Categorical data
- bar plot: `geom_bar()`

Multivariate
- box plot: `geom_boxplot()` where `y` is numeric and `x` is categorical
  - many options, see [documentation](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/geom_bar.html).
- scatter plot: `geom_point()`

### Other Options

- y-axis label: `+ labs(y = 'ylabel')`
- create sub plots conditioning on some discrete variables
  - `facet_grid()`: 2d grid, `rows ~ cols`, `.` for no split
  - `facet_wrap()`: 1d ribbon wrapped into 2d, useful when the condition variable takes too many values.
    - `+ facet_wrap(. ~ x_discrete)`
    - `+ facet_wrap(y_discrete ~ .)`

## Data Manipulation via `dplyr`

[cheat sheet](https://github.com/rstudio/cheatsheets/raw/master/data-transformation.pdf)

Consider a set of nested functions expressing a sequence of actions

```
park(drive(start_car(find("keys")), to =
"campus"))
```

We need to read from the inside. Is there a more friendly way?

### Introduction to `%>%`

The pipes operator `%>%`, in package `magrittr`, implements these functions in a more natural (and easier to read) way.

```
find("keys") %>%
start_car() %>%
drive(to = "campus") %>%
park()
```

By default, it sends the result of the LHS function as the **first** argument to the RHS function, to form a flow of results. To send results to a function argument other than first one, or to use the previous result for multiple arguments, use `.`:

```
starwars %>%
filter(species == "Human") %>%
lm(mass ~ height, data = .)
```

Calling `dplyr` verbs always outputs a new data frame, it does not alter
the existing data frame. To store the output, add it at the front

```
output <- data %>%
          ... %>%
          ...
```

If we want to store intermediate results, use `{. ->> obj}`

```
c <- cars %>%
    mutate(var1 = dist*speed) %>%
    {. ->> b } %>%   # here is save
    summary()
```

### Data Wrangling

- `select`: pick columns by name (no quotes)
  - `select(col1, col2)`
  - To add a chunk of columns use the `start_col:end_col` syntax: `select(col1:col3, col5:col7)`
  - Not select columns: `select(-col1, -(col3:col5))`
  - `one_of`: the column names can be stored in a vector `cols`, then passed in `select(one_of(cols))`. This ignores the column name in `col` that is not in that of the data set. Also see `any_of`, `all_of`, and other select [helpers](https://tidyselect.r-lib.org/reference/select_helpers.html).
  - `select(col2, col3, everything())` where `everything()` selects all columns after `col3`
  - `select(col1_name=col1)` to rename, or use `rename(col1_name=col1)`

- `select_if`: uses takes in each column same as `sapply`
  - `select_if(~is.numeric(.))` or in short `select_if(is.numeric)` selects columns with numerical values. For negation, use `select_if(~!is.numeric(.))` or `select_if(funs(!is.numeric(.)))`.
  - `select_if(funs(mean(.) > 4))` or `select_if(~mean(.) > 4)` select columns with column mean > 4. `mean > 4` is not a function in itself, so you will need to add a tilde `~`.
  - together, `select_if(~is.numeric(.) & mean(.,na.rm=TRUE) > 4)`

- `select_all()` function allows changes to all columns, and takes a function as an argument, e.g. `select_all(tolower) ` upfront, or wrap it inside funs()

- `slice`: pick rows using index(es)
  - `slice(c(7,8,14:15))`
  - `slice(-c(7,8,14:15))`

- `filter`: pick rows matching criteria
  - can use `AND, OR` and `NOT`, or below styles
  - `filter(condition1, condition2)` is equivalent to using `AND`
  - `filter(condition1, !condition2)`
  - `filter(condition1 | condition2)`
  - `filter(xor(condition1, condition2)` will return all rows where only one of the conditions is met, and not when both conditions are met.

- `arrange`: order rows by values of column(s), default ascending.
  - `arrange(col1)`
  - `arrange(desc(col1), col2)`
  - If `col1` in `desc(col1)` is a character variable, then sort from Z to A.

- `rename`: rename specific columns
  - `rename(col1_new_name=col1, col2_new_name=col2)`

- `mutate`: add new columns
  - New columns can be made with aggregate functions such as `average`, `median`, `max`, `min`, `sd`, and `ifelse`
  - `mutate(col1 = col1 - mean(col1))`
  - `mutate(col1or2 = ifelse(col1 > col2, 'col1', 'col2'))`
  - `mutate(col2 = case_when(col1>80 ~ 'great', col1>60 ~ 'good', TRUE~'others')` works like multi-level `ifelse`.

- `mutate_at` applies a function to one or several columns, like `sapply`. It does **not** create new columns.
  - `mutate_at(c('col1', 'col2'), ~ .-mean(.))`, note that column names are in quotes.
  - can also use `%>%` inside, `mutate_at(cols, ~ .-mean(.) %>% round(2))`.

- `transmute_at` return a new data frame with **only** the mutated variables.

- `bind_cols`, `bind_rows`: bind multiple data frames by row and column.
  - `%>% bind_cols(., df2)`

- `count`: return frequency of discrete variables. Add `sort=TRUE` to sort by counts.
  - `%>% count(col1, col2, sort=TRUE)`

- `group_by`: create groups of rows according to a condition. Use `ungroup` to recover

- `summarise`: apply computations across groups of rows, used with aggregation functions
  - `n`, `n_distinct`, `sum`, `max`, `min`, `mean`, `median`, `sd`

- `gather`: make wide data longer
  - `gather(key=new_key_col_name, value=new_value_col_name, -old_index)`
- `spread`: make long data wider
  - `spread(key=key_col_name, value=value_col_name)`

- `separate`: separate a character column to two by a separator.
  - `separate(col, c('new-col-1', 'new-col-2'), sep=' ')`
- `unite`: unite two columns to one by separator.
  - `unite('new-col', c(col1, col2), sep=' ')`

- `map`: apply computations across columns, related `map_dbl`, `map_dfr`
- `pmap`: apply computations across rows, related `pmap_dbl`, `pmap_dfr`

- `*_join` where `*` can be `inner`, `left`, `right`, or `full`: join two data frames together according to common values in certain columns, and `*` indicates how many rows to keep.
  - `*_join(df2, by='key')`. If column names differ, use `by=c("df1.name"="df2.name")`

### Comparison with SQL

Translate commands to SQL using [`translate_sql`](https://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/sql-translation.html).

| Objective | R | SQL | Remark |
| - | - | - | - |
| select columns  | `select(col1, col2)`  | `SELECT col1, col2`  |   |
| filter | `filter(col1 > 2)`  | `WHERE col1 > 2`  |   |
| order rows  | `arrange(col1, desc(col2))`  | `ORDER BY col1, col2 DESC`  |   |


### Pros

By comment a line
- easy to see its effect on the final result, e.g. some filter


## Comparison with Python

| Objective | Python | R | Remark|
| - | - | - | - |
|append to array| `mylist.append(x)` | `myvec = c(myvec, x)`| |
| create a sequence   |  `range(start, stop, step)` or `range(10)` | `seq(from, to, by)` or `seq(10)` | python is zero indexed |
| add y-axis label | `plt.ylabel('ylabel')` | `plot(..., ylab = 'ylabel')`<br>`... + labs(y = 'ylabel')`| |
| add title | `plt.title('title')` | `title('title')`| |
| length of a string | `len(my_string)` | `nchar(my_string)`| |
| arrays comparison | `np.isin(a, b)`<br> `np.isin(a, b, invert=True)` | `a %in% b`<br> `!(a %in% b)`| returns a logical array of the same shape as `a` |
| add a column | `df['new_col'] = ...`  | `df$new_col = ... ` or `df = data.frame(df, new_col_name = ...)`|  |
| delete a column | `df.drop(['B', 'C'], axis=1)` or `df.drop(columns=['B', 'C'])` | `df$col <- NULL` or `df = df[, -col_index]`|  |
| delete a row   | `df.drop([0, 1])`  |   |   |
| min index | `np.argmin()` | `which.min()`|  |
| frequency of discrete values in a vector | `pd.Series.value_counts()` | `summary()`|  |

## Miscellaneous

`=` vs `<-`
- in most cases, they are equivalent
- unlike `=`, the other direction `->` also works, which is convenient at the end of a line
- inside function argument assignment `fun(x=...)`, must use `=`.
