# R

## Data Structures

R has many data structures, which include

- atomic vector
- list
- matrix
- data frame
- ...

To check and convert data type:
- `class()` high-level data type/structures: data frame, matrix, etc
- `typeof()` low-level data type: character, logical, double, integer ...
- `is.sth()`: is numeric? character?
- `as.sth()`: convert to numeric, character etc.
- `identical(x1, x2)`

Comparison of the four data structures

|Dimensions| Homogenous| Heterogeneous|
|-| -| -|
|1-D| atomic vector |list|
|2-D| matrix| data frame|


### Vector

```{margin}
Technically, vectors can be one of two types: atomic vectors and lists, although the term “vector” most commonly refers to the atomic types not to lists.
```

A vector is the most common and basic data structure in R. A vector is a collection of elements that are of one (homogenous) mode `character, logical, integer` or `numeric`.

creation
- empty vector: `vector()` (By default the mode is logical).
  - `vector("character", length = 5)` creates a vector of mode 'character' with 5 elements.
  - `character(5)` same thing
  - `numeric(5)` a numeric vector with 5 elements
  - `logical(5)` # a logical vector with 5 elements
- integer vs numeric
  - `c(1, 2)`: double precision real numbers
  - `c(1L, 2L)`: integer, or use `as.integer()`
- character `c('a', 'b')`, logical, etc.


:::{admonition,note} Note
The contents of a list are not restricted to a **single** mode. If multiple types are inside a vector `c(1, 'a')`, R will create a resulting vector with a mode that can most easily accommodate all the elements it contains. This conversion between modes of storage is called “coercion”. When R converts the mode of storage based on its content, it is referred to as “implicit coercion”.

manual coercion: `as.integer(), as.character()`, etc.
:::


### List

A list can contains elements of different types. Lists are sometimes called generic vectors, because the elements of a list can by of any type of R object, even lists containing further lists. This property makes them fundamentally different from atomic vectors.

Creation
- from vector: `as.list(1:10)`
- from input: `pie = list(type="key lime", diameter=7, is.vegetarian=TRUE)`

Indexing
- by element name: `pie$diameter`
- by brackets: `pie[1]` the first element, `pie[[1]]` the first element in the first element.

### Matrix

A matrix is an extension of the numeric or character vectors. It is simply an atomic vector with dimensions.

### Data Frames

A data frame is a special type of list where every element of the list has same length (i.e. data frame is a “rectangular” list). One can check `is.list(df)` returns `TRUE`.

Data frames can have additional attributes such as `rownames()`.

Creation
- from imported data: `read.csv(), read.table()`
- from vectors: `data.frame(id = letters[1:10], x
= 1:10, y = 11:20)`


Functions
- shape: `dim(), nrow(), ncol(), str()`
- preview data: `head(), tail(), str()`
- `names()` or `colnames()`, `na.omit()`
- `sapply(df, fun)`: run `fun()` function for each column of df

Indexing
- by column name: `df$colname`
- `df[index, col1]`, still matrix
- `df[index, ]$col1`, vector
- `df[row_num, col_num]`, or `df[vec_of_num, vec_of_num]`

Data cleaning
- `is.na()`
- `anyNA()`

### Factors

Factor objects are how R stores categorical variables, which is character data into fixed numbers of integers. Each category is called a 'level'.

```
x = factor(c('a', 'b', 'c', 'a'))
str(x) # Factor w/ 3 levels "a","b","c": 1 2 3 1
typeof(x) # [1] "integer"
levels(x) # [1] "a" "b" "c"
nlevels(x) # 3
```

By default, R always sorts levels in alphabetical order. To specify levels, use `ordered = TRUE`.

```
chili <- factor(c("hotter", "hot", "hotter", "hottest", "hot", "hot"))
factor(chili, levels = c("hot", "hotter", "hottest"), ordered = TRUE)
min(chili) # hot
max(chili) # hottest
```

## Visualization via ggplot

### Syntax

Basic syntax is as below:

```R
ggplot(data = [dataset],
       mapping = aes(x = [x-variable],
                     y = [y-variable]) +
    geom_xxx() +
    other_options
```

For instance, scatter plot (point plot) of two variables

```R

ggplot(data = starwars,
       mapping = aes(x = height,
                     y = mass)) +
    geom_point()

```

### Aesthetic Mapping

To display values, map variables in the data to visual properties of the
geom (aesthetics) in your plot, e.g. x and y location, size, shape, color etc.

```R
mapping = aes(x = height,
              y = mass,
              color = sex))
```


:::{admonition,warning} Warning

Putting `aes()` in different places can affect the final output.

In the coe below, only one smoothing line is fitted. The aesthetic mapping `aes(color=sex)` is in the `geom_point()` plot level. Points will have different colors according to the corresponding sex.

```
ggplot(data = starwars,
       mapping = aes(x = height, y = mass)) +
  geom_point(aes(color=sex)) +
  geom_smooth(se = FALSE) +
  xlim(80, 250) +
  ylim(0, 180)
```

In the code below, the aesthetic mapping `aes(color=sex)` is in the `ggplot()` input level, so the data sets are partitioned into parts by sex, and R runs the next `geom` commands for each part.

```
ggplot(data = starwars,
       mapping = aes(x = height, y = mass, color=sex)) +
  geom_point() +
  geom_smooth(se = FALSE) +
  xlim(80, 250) +
  ylim(0, 180)

```

:::


| aesthetics | discrete | continuous |
| - | - | - |
| color | rainbow of colors | gradient |
| size | discrete steps | linear mapping between radius and value |
| shape | different shape for each| NA |

### Use of `geom`

Numerical data
- density: `geom_density()`
- histogram: `geom_histogram(binwidth = 10)`
- smoothing line: `geom_smooth(se = FALSE) + xlim() + ylim()`

Categorical data
- bar plot: `geom_bar()`

Multivariate
- box plot: `geom_boxplot()` where `y` is numeric and `x` is categorical
  - many options, see [documentation](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/geom_bar.html).
- scatter plot: `geom_point()`

### Other Options

- y-axis label: `+ labs(y = 'ylabel')`
- create sub plots conditioning on some discrete variables
  - `facet_grid()`: 2d grid, `rows ~ cols`, `.` for no split
  - `facet_wrap()`: 1d ribbon wrapped into 2d, useful when the condition variable takes too many values.
    - `+ facet_wrap(. ~ x_discrete)`
    - `+ facet_wrap(y_discrete ~ .)`

## Comparison with Python

| objective | python | r | remark|
| - | - | - | - |
|append to array| `mylist.append(x)` | `myvec = c(myvec, x)`| |
| create a sequence   |  `range(start, stop, step)` or `range(10)` | `seq(from, to, by)` or `seq(10)` | python is zero indexed |
| add y-axis label | `plt.ylabel('ylabel')` | `+ labs(y = 'ylabel')`| |
| length of a string | `len(my_string)` | `nchar(my_string)`| |
| arrays comparison | `np.isin(a, b)` | `a %in% b`| returns a logical array of the same shape as `a` |
| add a column |  | `df$new_col = new_col` or `df = data.frame(df, new_col_name = new_col)`|  |
| delete a column |  | `df$col <- NULL` or `df = df[, -col_index]`|  |
| min index | `np.argmin()` | `which.min()`|  |

## Miscellaneous

`=` vs `<-`
- in most cases, they are equivalent
- unlike `=`, the other direction `->` also works, which is convenient at the end of a line
- inside function argument assignment `fun(x=...)`, must use `=`.
